docs/contrib/02_continuous_integration.md, before:

# Continuous Integration in pySDC

Any commit in `pySDC` are tested by GitHub continuous integration (CI). You can see in in the [action panel](https://github.com/Parallel-in-Time/pySDC/actions) the tests for each branches.
Those tests are currently divided in three main categories : [code linting](#code-linting), [code testing](#code-testing) and [code coverage](#code-coverage).
Finally, the CI also build artifacts that are used to generate the documentation website (see http://parallel-in-time.org/pySDC/), more details given in the [documentation generation](#documentation-generation) section.

## Code linting

Code style linting is performed using [black](https://black.readthedocs.io/en/stable/) and [flakeheaven](https://flakeheaven.readthedocs.io/en/latest/) for code syntax checking. In particular, `black` is used to check compliance with (most of) [PEP-8 guidelines](https://peps.python.org/pep-0008/).

Those tests are conducted for each commit (even for forks), but you can also run it locally in the root folder of `pySDC` before pushing any commit :

```bash
# Install required packages (works also with conda/mamba)
pip install black flakeheaven flake8-comprehensions flake8-bugbear
# First : test code style linting with black
black pySDC --check --diff --color
# Second : test code syntax with flakeheaven
flakeheaven lint --benchmark pySDC
```

> :bell: To avoid any error about formatting (`black`), you can simply use this program to reformat your code directly using the command :
>
> ```bash
> black pySDC
> ```

Some style rules that are automatically enforced :

- lines should be not longer than 120 characters
- arithmetic operators (`+`, `*`, ...) should be separated with variables by one empty space

You can automate linting by running black and flakeheaven on all staged files every time you make a commit in a pre-commit hook.
To this end, just add the following to a possibly new file in the path `<pySDC-root-directory>/.git/hooks/pre-commit`:

```bash
#!/bin/sh

export repopath=$(git rev-parse --show-toplevel)
export currentpath=$(pwd)

cd $repopath
 
export files=$(git diff --staged --name-only HEAD | grep .py)

if [[ $files != "" ]]
then  
        black $files
        git add $files
         
        export flakeheaven_output=$(flakeheaven lint $files)
        if [[ "$flakeheaven_output" != 0 ]]
        then 
            flakeheaven lint $files
            exit 1
        else
            echo "No flakeheaven issues"
            exit 0
        fi
fi

cd $currentpath
```

You may need to run `chmod +x` on the file to allow it to be executed.
Be aware that the hook will alter files you may have opened in an editor whenever you make a commit, which may confuse you(r editor). 
Also, this will not allow you to commit anything that does not pass flakeheaven's linting.

As a final note, make sure to regularly update linting related packages, as they constantly introduce checking of more PEP8 guidelines.
This might cause the linting to fail in the GitHub action, which uses the most up to date versions available on the conda-forge channel, even though it passed locally.

## Code testing

This is done using [pytest](https://docs.pytest.org/en/7.2.x/), and runs all the tests written in the `pySDC/tests` folder. You can run those locally in the root folder of `pySDC` using :

```bash
# Install required packages (works also with conda/mamba)
pip install pytest<7.2.0 pytest-benchmark coverage[toml]
# Run tests
pytest -v pySDC/tests
```

> :bell: Many components are tested (core, implementations, projects, tutorials, etc ...) which make the testing quite long.
> When working on a single part of the code, you can run only the corresponding part of the test by specifying the test path, for instance :
>
> ```bash
> pytest -v pySDC/tests/test_nodes.py  # only test nodes generation
> ```

## Code coverage

This stage allows to checks how much of the `pySDC` code is tested by the previous stage. It is based on the [coverage](https://pypi.org/project/coverage/) library and currently applied to the following directories :

- `pySDC/core`
- `pySDC/projects`
- `pySDC/tutorial`

This analysis is done in parallel to the test each time a pull is done on any branch (main repository or fork).
You can look at the current coverage report for the master branch [here](https://parallel-in-time.org/pySDC/coverage/index.html) or compare the results with previous builds [here](https://app.codecov.io/gh/Parallel-in-Time/pySDC). Codecov will also comment on any pull request, indicating the change of coverage.

During developments, you can also run the coverage tests locally, using :

```bash
echo "print('Loading sitecustomize.py...');import coverage;coverage.process_startup()" > sitecustomize.py
coverage run -m pytest --continue-on-collection-errors -v --durations=0 pySDC/tests
```

> :bell: Note that this will run all `pySDC` tests while analyzing coverage, hence requires all packages installed for the [code testing stage](#code-testing).

Once the test are finished, you can collect and post-process coverage result :

```bash
coverage combine
python -m coverage html
```

This will generate the coverage report in a `htmlcov` folder, and you can open the `index.html` file within using your favorite browser.

> :warning: Coverage can be lower if some tests fails (for instance, if you did not install all required python package to run all the tests).

### Coverage exceptions

Some types of code lines will be ignored by the coverage analysis (_e.g_ lines starting with `raise`, ...), see the `[tool.coverage.report]` section in `pyproject.toml`.
Part of code (functions, conditionaly, for loops, etc ...) can be ignored by coverage analysis using the `# pragma: no cover`, for instance

```python
# ...
# code analyzed by coverage
# ...
if condition:  # pragma: no cover
    # code ignored by coverage
# ...
# code analyzed by coverage
# ...
def function():  # pragma: no cover
    # all function code is ignored by coverage
```

Accepted use of the `# pragma: no cover` are:

1. Functions and code used for plotting
2. Lines in one conditional preceding any `raise` statement

If you think the pragma should be used in other parts of your pull request, please indicate (and justify) this in your description.

## Documentation generation

Documentation is built using [sphinx](https://www.sphinx-doc.org/en/master/).
To check its generation, you can wait for all the CI tasks to download the `docs` artifacts, unzip it and open the `index.html` file there with you favorite browser.

However, when you are working on documentation (of the project, of the code, etc ...), you can already build and check the website locally :

```bash
# Run all tests, continuing even with errors
pytest --continue-on-collection-errors -v --durations=0 pySDC/tests
# Generate rst files for sphinx
./docs/update_apidocs.sh
# Generate html documentation
sphinx-build -b html docs/source docs/build/html
```

Then you can open `docs/build/html/index.html` using you favorite browser and check how your own documentation looks like on the website.

> :bell: **Important** : running all the tests is necessary to generate graphs and images used by the website.
> But you can still generate the website without it: just all images for the tutorials, projects and playgrounds will be missing.
> This approach can be considered for local testing of your contribution when it does not concern parts containing images (_i.e_ project or code documentation).

:arrow_left: [Back to Pull Request Recommendation](./01_pull_requests.md) ---
:arrow_up: [Contributing Summary](./../../CONTRIBUTING.md) ---
:arrow_right: [Next to Naming Conventions](./03_naming_conventions.md)

Commit message:

Split the pre-commit hook in two, such that flakeheaven now shows up as as a comment in the commit message instead of aborting the commit

docs/contrib/02_continuous_integration.md, after:

# Continuous Integration in pySDC

Any commit in `pySDC` are tested by GitHub continuous integration (CI). You can see in in the [action panel](https://github.com/Parallel-in-Time/pySDC/actions) the tests for each branches.
Those tests are currently divided in three main categories : [code linting](#code-linting), [code testing](#code-testing) and [code coverage](#code-coverage).
Finally, the CI also build artifacts that are used to generate the documentation website (see http://parallel-in-time.org/pySDC/), more details given in the [documentation generation](#documentation-generation) section.

## Code linting

Code style linting is performed using [black](https://black.readthedocs.io/en/stable/) and [flakeheaven](https://flakeheaven.readthedocs.io/en/latest/) for code syntax checking. In particular, `black` is used to check compliance with (most of) [PEP-8 guidelines](https://peps.python.org/pep-0008/).

Those tests are conducted for each commit (even for forks), but you can also run it locally in the root folder of `pySDC` before pushing any commit :

```bash
# Install required packages (works also with conda/mamba)
pip install black flakeheaven flake8-comprehensions flake8-bugbear
# First : test code style linting with black
black pySDC --check --diff --color
# Second : test code syntax with flakeheaven
flakeheaven lint --benchmark pySDC
```

> :bell: To avoid any error about formatting (`black`), you can simply use this program to reformat your code directly using the command :
>
> ```bash
> black pySDC
> ```

Some style rules that are automatically enforced :

- lines should be not longer than 120 characters
- arithmetic operators (`+`, `*`, ...) should be separated with variables by one empty space

You can automate linting somewhat by using git hooks.
In order to run black automatically, we want to do a pre-commit hook which adds the modified files to the commit after reformatting.
To this end, just add the following to a possibly new file in the path `<pySDC-root-directory>/.git/hooks/pre-commit`:

```bash
#!/bin/sh

export files=$(git diff --staged --name-only HEAD | grep .py | sed -e "s,^,$(git rev-parse --show-toplevel)/,")

if [[ $files != "" ]]
then  
        black $files
        git add $files
fi
```

You may need to run `chmod +x` on the file to allow it to be executed.
Be aware that the hook will alter files you may have opened in an editor whenever you make a commit, which may confuse you(r editor). 

To automate flakeheaven, we want to write a hook that alters the commit message in case any errors are detected. This gives us the choice of aborting the commit and fixing the issues, or we can go ahead and commit them and worry about flakeheaven only when the time comes to do a pull request.
To obtain this functionality, add the following to `<pySDC-root-directory>/.git/hooks/prepare-commit-msg`:

```bash
#!/bin/sh

COMMIT_MSG_FILE=$1

export files=$(git diff --staged --name-only HEAD | grep .py | sed -e "s,^,$(git rev-parse --show-toplevel)/,")

if [[ $files != "" ]]
then
        export flakeheaven_output=$(flakeheaven lint --format default $files)
        if [[ "$flakeheaven_output" != 0 ]]
        then
                git interpret-trailers --in-place --trailer "$(echo "$flakeheaven_output" | sed -e 's/^/#/')" "$COMMIT_MSG_FILE"
                git interpret-trailers --in-place --trailer "#!!!!!!!!!! WARNING: FLAKEHEAVEN FAILED !!!!!!!!!!" "$COMMIT_MSG_FILE"
        fi
fi

```
Don't forget to assign execution rights.

As a final note, make sure to regularly update linting related packages, as they constantly introduce checking of more PEP8 guidelines.
This might cause the linting to fail in the GitHub action, which uses the most up to date versions available on the conda-forge channel, even though it passed locally.

## Code testing

This is done using [pytest](https://docs.pytest.org/en/7.2.x/), and runs all the tests written in the `pySDC/tests` folder. You can run those locally in the root folder of `pySDC` using :

```bash
# Install required packages (works also with conda/mamba)
pip install pytest<7.2.0 pytest-benchmark coverage[toml]
# Run tests
pytest -v pySDC/tests
```

> :bell: Many components are tested (core, implementations, projects, tutorials, etc ...) which make the testing quite long.
> When working on a single part of the code, you can run only the corresponding part of the test by specifying the test path, for instance :
>
> ```bash
> pytest -v pySDC/tests/test_nodes.py  # only test nodes generation
> ```

## Code coverage

This stage allows to checks how much of the `pySDC` code is tested by the previous stage. It is based on the [coverage](https://pypi.org/project/coverage/) library and currently applied to the following directories :

- `pySDC/core`
- `pySDC/projects`
- `pySDC/tutorial`

This analysis is done in parallel to the test each time a pull is done on any branch (main repository or fork).
You can look at the current coverage report for the master branch [here](https://parallel-in-time.org/pySDC/coverage/index.html) or compare the results with previous builds [here](https://app.codecov.io/gh/Parallel-in-Time/pySDC). Codecov will also comment on any pull request, indicating the change of coverage.

During developments, you can also run the coverage tests locally, using :

```bash
echo "print('Loading sitecustomize.py...');import coverage;coverage.process_startup()" > sitecustomize.py
coverage run -m pytest --continue-on-collection-errors -v --durations=0 pySDC/tests
```

> :bell: Note that this will run all `pySDC` tests while analyzing coverage, hence requires all packages installed for the [code testing stage](#code-testing).

Once the test are finished, you can collect and post-process coverage result :

```bash
coverage combine
python -m coverage html
```

This will generate the coverage report in a `htmlcov` folder, and you can open the `index.html` file within using your favorite browser.

> :warning: Coverage can be lower if some tests fails (for instance, if you did not install all required python package to run all the tests).

### Coverage exceptions

Some types of code lines will be ignored by the coverage analysis (_e.g_ lines starting with `raise`, ...), see the `[tool.coverage.report]` section in `pyproject.toml`.
Part of code (functions, conditionaly, for loops, etc ...) can be ignored by coverage analysis using the `# pragma: no cover`, for instance

```python
# ...
# code analyzed by coverage
# ...
if condition:  # pragma: no cover
    # code ignored by coverage
# ...
# code analyzed by coverage
# ...
def function():  # pragma: no cover
    # all function code is ignored by coverage
```

Accepted use of the `# pragma: no cover` are:

1. Functions and code used for plotting
2. Lines in one conditional preceding any `raise` statement

If you think the pragma should be used in other parts of your pull request, please indicate (and justify) this in your description.

## Documentation generation

Documentation is built using [sphinx](https://www.sphinx-doc.org/en/master/).
To check its generation, you can wait for all the CI tasks to download the `docs` artifacts, unzip it and open the `index.html` file there with you favorite browser.

However, when you are working on documentation (of the project, of the code, etc ...), you can already build and check the website locally :

```bash
# Run all tests, continuing even with errors
pytest --continue-on-collection-errors -v --durations=0 pySDC/tests
# Generate rst files for sphinx
./docs/update_apidocs.sh
# Generate html documentation
sphinx-build -b html docs/source docs/build/html
```

Then you can open `docs/build/html/index.html` using you favorite browser and check how your own documentation looks like on the website.

> :bell: **Important** : running all the tests is necessary to generate graphs and images used by the website.
> But you can still generate the website without it: just all images for the tutorials, projects and playgrounds will be missing.
> This approach can be considered for local testing of your contribution when it does not concern parts containing images (_i.e_ project or code documentation).

:arrow_left: [Back to Pull Request Recommendation](./01_pull_requests.md) ---
:arrow_up: [Contributing Summary](./../../CONTRIBUTING.md) ---
:arrow_right: [Next to Naming Conventions](./03_naming_conventions.md)
